# Profiling rav1e

<details>
<summary><b>Table of Content</b></summary>

- [Cargo integrations](#cargo-integrations)
  - [Flamegraph](#flamegraph)
  - [Instruments](#instruments)
- [Generic profiling](#generic-profiling)
  - [Perf](#perf)
  - [uftrace](#uftrace)
- [Tracing](#tracing)
  - [Hawktracer](#hawktracer)
- [Codegen Inspection](#codegen-inspection)
  - [Assembly](#assembly)
</details>

## Cargo integrations

There are multiple integrations with `cargo` that simplify your life a lot .

### Flamegraph
[flamegraph](https://github.com/ferrous-systems/flamegraph) works in any
platform that has `dtrace` or `perf` support.

```
$ cargo install flamegraph
$ cargo flamegraph -o flame.svg -b rav1e -- ~/sample.y4m -o /dev/null
$ $browser flame.svg
```

> **NOTE** Make sure the browser lets you use the built-in interactivity in the
> svg.

### Instruments
[cargo-instruments](https://github.com/cmyr/cargo-instruments) is macOS-only
and integrates neatly with the XCode UI.

```
$ cargo install cargo-instruments
$ cargo instruments --release --open --bin rav1e -- ~/sample.y4m -o /dev/null
```

## Generic profiling

### Perf

Most common linux-specific profiler, to use the callgraphs you need dwarf
debug symbols.

```
$ cargo build --release
$ perf record --call-graph dwarf target/release/rav1e ~/sample.y4m -o /dev/null
$ perf report
```

### uftrace

[uftrace](https://github.com/namhyung/uftrace) is an ELF-specific tracer.
It leverages the `mcount` instrumentation.

```
$ cargo rustc --release --bin rav1e -- -Z instrument-mcount
$ uftrace record --no-libcall -D 5 target/release/rav1e ~/sample.y4m -o /dev/null
$ uftrace report
```

## Tracing

### Hawktracer

We use [rust\_hawktracer](https://github.com/AlexEne/rust_hawktracer) to
measure specific codepath timings. Building `--features=tracing` enables it.
Use the standard [hawktrace-convert](https://hawktracer.org) to produce graphs.

Currently there are issues where rust_hawktracer fails to build, as a result
we have set it to use the system hawktracer library. On Arch Linux this may
be installed from the AUR package hawktracer-git.

## Codegen Inspection

### Assembly

[cargo-show-asm](https://github.com/pacak/cargo-show-asm) can be used to inspect the assembly
generated by the Rust compiler. This can be helpful for micro-optimizations including
coercing the compiler to auto-vectorize a function.

Simple setup:

- Install cargo-show-asm: `cargo install cargo-show-asm`
- Generate the list of functions: `cargo asm > fn.list`
- Search for the function you want to analyze: `grep cdef_dist fn.list`
  - If the function doesn't appear, it may be inlined by the compiler.
    You can temporarily add `#[inline(never)]` to the function
    to bypass this issue.
- Generate ASM for your function: `cargo asm rav1e::rdo::cdef_dist_wxh > out.asm`
  you can enter full function name, pattern or sequential number
